README.md, before:

os-autoinst/openQA tests for openSUSE and SUSE Linux Enterprise [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse?branch=master)
=================================================================================================================================================================================================================================
os-autoinst-distri-opensuse is repo which contains tests, which are executed
by openQA for openSUSE and SLE distributions.

Needles for openSUSE distributions are located in [os-autoinst-needles-opensuse](https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-needles-opensuse)

For more details see http://os-autoinst.github.io/openQA/

Please, find test variables description [here](https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse/blob/master/variables.md)

## How to contribute
Please, refer to [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

Most files are minimal copyleft, but some more complex tests are GPL. So please
check the license within the files.

Commit message:

Scheduling yast2_gui with yaml scheduling

README.md, after:

os-autoinst/openQA tests for openSUSE and SUSE Linux Enterprise [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse?branch=master)
=================================================================================================================================================================================================================================
os-autoinst-distri-opensuse is repo which contains tests, which are executed
by openQA for openSUSE and SLE distributions.

Needles for openSUSE distributions are located in [os-autoinst-needles-opensuse](https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-needles-opensuse)

For more details see http://os-autoinst.github.io/openQA/

Please, find test variables description [here](https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse/blob/master/variables.md)

For using using new mechanism to schedule modules:
[sample yaml format](schedule.md)

## How to contribute
Please, refer to [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst-distri-opensuse/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

Most files are minimal copyleft, but some more complex tests are GPL. So please
check the license within the files.
